# Why you should listen to me

The world of crypto and blockchains is filled with very loud voices, many of whom barely understand what a blockchain is. There are many reasons for you to distrust me. If you grab a few random accounts on Twitter associated with a topic like "blockchains" I wouldn't be surprised if there is an 80% chance any one of them should not be taken seriously.

If you distrust me, that is a healthy position to start from. That said, there are reasons for you to hear me out. The core of these are:

1. I am a programmer, who actually codes applications that interact with blockchains
2. I have been around the crypto space since 2013, I am more sceptical than you
3. My opinions have nuance, and I'm happy to change them

As a programmer, I have built "regular" applications that have nothing to do with blockchains and continue to do so. Within the blockchain space, I have:

- created [signer.is](https://signer.is/), an open-source tool used to do crypto-wallet things like making cryptographic signatures or creating payment links
- written all the (on- and off-chain) code for an NFT project called [the Rocketeers](https://rocketeer.fans/) for a community I enjoy being a part of
- contributed to the applications of the [Proof of Attendance Protocol](https://poap.xyz/) which is my current employer (and has nothing to do with this book)

I've been involved in the blockchain community (if that can be said to exist) for a while. I'm by no means a key player in any aspect of it but have a very visible record of not being a complete idiot, some illustrations of this are that I:

- was [interviewed by Bitcoin magazine](https://bitcoinmagazine.com/culture/an-interview-with-mentor-palokaj-of-bluevpn-1374705552) in 2013, which honestly was because I was advertising my VPN side project and they were nice
- [participated](https://app.poap.xyz/token/2331056) in the Ethereum crowd sale. It was on a student budget, so I'm not as rich as that statement makes it sound
- [Translated the Ethereum Mist wallet](https://github.com/ethereum/mist/pull/618), which was the first official Ethereum wallet, to my native Dutch in 2016

As far as my opinions go, I am not going to fit into a neat bucket of "crypto bro" or "crypto sceptic". You can call me a "crypto gnostic" if you like, I know how blockchains work but have no strong value judgement about them. I see blockchains like any programming tool: as useful as their suitability to a task. And they are completely unsuitable for the vast majority of applications programmers make. As a general rule, I'm very comfortable with changing my opinion on most things, and I see doing so as a sign of intellectual growth.