# Epilogue

This book has covered my framework for looking at blockchain technology applications. I tried to steer away from my opinion on more hot-button topics that tend to come up when blockchains are the topic of conversation. I know I will get many questions about those things if I don't address them briefly. So in this epilogue, I'll cover some of my views on the more controversial aspects of blockchains.

Please note that everything in this section is:

- my opinion as of mid-2023
- subject to change as I learn more
- not intended to tell you what to think or do

Please enjoy what my fellow internet friends call my "unpopular opinions".

## Financial bubbles are a feature, not a bug

My academic background is mostly in biology. I get paid to write code, but I like to think in metaphors of biological systems. A "function" in programming? Like a ribosome: in go the ~~RNA and amino acids~~ parameters, out come the ~~protein~~ return value. Financial markets, including the crypto markets, are no different: you can view them as ecologies of organisms.

Financial bubbles tend not to be loved, and terms like the "boom and bust cycle" and "tulip mania" are synonymous with the folly of humans. We keep getting tricked into getting over-excited about a new technology, investing crazy money in it, and then watching it all burn. Do you know what I see in financial bubbles? The Galapagos islands.

The Galapagos islands inspired Darwin to formulate the theory of evolution, he looked around at the crazy animals and plants there and thought: no way this could have happened in different conditions. In the 21st century, we take for granted that isolated habitats with unique properties give rise to unique species. And those species persist after those conditions end (provided the new conditions are not hostile).

Financial bubbles are like little Galapagos islands, unique habitats where crazy amounts of money go to crazy ideas. Take some historical financial bubbles well-known in the West:

- In 18th century England the South Sea bubble saw a stock hype around a slave trade effort
- In the US, the 19th-century railroad bubble caused massive overinvestment in the railroad sector
- The 20th century saw the birth of the dot-com bubble that fueled irrational investment in internet companies

The list above prompts two thoughts in my personally:

1. I'm not convinced we'd have globalisation, railroad networks, and a developed internet if not for these bubbles
2. We should keep strengthening the guardrails of human dignity internationally, especially in financial bubbles[^For those not familiar with the above financial bubbles, the first one traded in humans. The second saw great mistreatment of immigrant groups building infrastructure, and the last has a more hidden human cost of mining what we now call "conflict minerals" under what our Western sensibilities would firmly call inhumane circumstances.]

Financial bubbles are little Galapagos islands in time where we collectively overinvest in something. Sometimes that leads to very expensive tulip bulbs. Sometimes it gives us the internet. We never know which beforehand, because before the bubble nobody would invest in it, and only after the bubble do we pretend that the path of progress was inevitable.

I'll add one more example, because it has an analogy to our present: much of our technology stems from the Cold War space race. I'd comfortably argue this was a financial bubble within government administration. What is more hype and dream-fueled behaviour than racing to the moon just because you can? The reason you have GPS is because a bunch of men decided to engage in a pissing contest over who could get to the moon first.

Four consecutive US presidents kept it going. A game befitting of hormone-addled teenagers. Only they had the budget of global superpowers at their disposal.

"Last one there is a rotten egg".

Think about that. Really.

## Developed nations overestimate international trust

Trustless ledgers are a way to coordinate who owns what between entities or groups that do not trust each other.

A good portion of people hear about the characteristics of blockchains and seem not to see the point. Why spend so much effort to send magic internet money when you can just use your bank? Didn't we set up a global financial system for this? Why on earth would people even use stable coins aside from fraud? We already have "digital money" as evidenced by the app on my phone?

The thing is that digital money as is common in many industrialised nations is much less stable and interoperable than people think. It's almost 2024, and I still get banks losing my international transfers[^As per my previous anecdote, where my favourite tea merchant in Japan had to hassle their bank for weeks to find out where the money went], or simply reverting transfers I make to friends in the US without telling me or my friend why[^Jonas got his money eventually, but not before multiple international friends were unable to pay him back for the Airbnb he booked for us], or my personal (least) favourite situation where I transferred money to an Ecuadorian friend and some of the money just disappeared along the way[^Note that I had explicitly paid for all transfer and exchange fees on my end, and the bank on their end did not claim the lost money as their fee, the amount that arrived was just... Less.]. I too love companies like [Wise](https://wise.com) who simplify international transfers, but the fact that a company like that needs to exist should tell you something[^Added context: I use Wise for all my international transfers, usually things work out just fine, but the above examples of international transfer issues all occurred through their systems].

Why is the system so fragmented and fragile? Part of it is legacy tech from the 80s and 90s. But part of it is simply that the intermediate banks that route the money do not trust each other. If I want to transfer money to a freelancer in India, there is a good chance the money needs to go through a small Dutch bank, to a larger Dutch bank, to a large Indian bank, and finally to a small local bank. The Dutch banks trust each other so that part is fast and cheap. The Dutch big bank does not trust the large Indian bank and will charge a fee for the hedging of the transfer[^Which can take all sorts of forms depending on the transfer. Things like the speed of the transfer, the changing of currencies, the double checking of compliance documents etc]. I don't know how stable the Indian banking system is, but I would not be surprised if the big bank there doesn't trust the small bank without collateral to back up their positions.

This is perhaps a convoluted example, but the moral of the story is that the international financial system is a web of complexity of which a large part exists purely because the underlying parties do not trust each other. And because of that, they need all sorts of assurances and third parties to keep people in line.

The result: slow and expensive banking.

## Our status quo bias is hurting everyone

Think about credit cards for a minute, specifically their fees:

- you as a card owner usually pay a monthly/yearly fee
- the merchant pays a flat fee (usually 0.1-0.5 Euro/Dollar) plus a percentage (usually 1.5-2.5%)[^I'm going off of the Stripe.com fees, I know that very large merchants negotiate discounts, and many merchants also pay higher fees than this]

If you order a $5 coffee from a small coffee shop with a credit card, it's not unlikely they will have to pay $0.25 + ( $5 * 2.5% ) = $0.375. If you buy an electronic device from a retailer for $1500, that number comes to $37.75. Think about that, think about the amount of "tax" we are collectively paying just so we can transact safely with each other.

This is just one example of our status quo bias. The fact that we accept system-wide inefficiencies purely because we are used to them. Any rational person would agree that removing 2% worth of friction in the consumer economy would be a good thing for everyone. But we accept the current situation because it is what we know.

The reasons for this are many, and not simply payment processors being crooks. The system behind credit card payments is one of risk management, unpredictable chargebacks, and multiple intermediate financial infrastructure providers.

In the parlance of a computer programmer: we have legacy bloat. Technical debt. The past is a drag on our present. If you were to ask someone to redesign our financial system from the ground up, few people would come up with the convoluted system we have now.

Blockchains are not a panacea, but they can solve a very real problem of bypassing a bloated and opaque legacy system. I am fully aware of the downsides and complications of using blockchains to transact in 2023. It's like having access to the SWIFT payment system: you can do very powerful things, but you can really shoot yourself in the foot too. But call me a '90s kid, I see potential here. Potential to make transacting of many types a lot smoother and safer.

## Most people have no idea how money works

The world of money is very wonky, and much of it just "kind of happened that way". I'm not going to pretend I understand the global monetary system to the depths of its soul. But I am continuously surprised and kind of abhorred at the lack of understanding by people who really need to know better.

Here are some fun things that I know now, which sound at best weird and at worst like tin-foil hat conspiracies:

- The majority of money is made by commercial banks, not by governments. When a bank creates a loan, they literally create that money. The central bank of a country usually has no direct control over this[^Don't take my word for it, the Bank of England explains it pretty well in their 2014 paper "Money creation in the modern economy". How much money banks create depends on regulatory requirements and profitability]
- The US dollar is central to global trade, dollars that exist outside of the US market are called eurodollars[^The term "euro" here just means "international" and is not a direct reference to Europe or the Euro currency], we have no idea how many eurodollars exist, they do not need to comply with US rules, estimates of the eurodollar market are that there are more eurodollars than domestic dollars, the US has little control over eurodollars

I know bankers. They don't believe me when I say banks create money. Until I show them the Bank of England paper. As for eurodollars and shadow banking, I don't bring those up in conversation. For a start, I don't know enough. Plus I think my conversation partners will think I'm off of my proverbial meds.

That said, the same people who have no idea how the monetary system works will have strong opinions on whether blockchain assets do or do not have value. I try to have more humility: I don't know what has value.

The more I learn the more I am mystified that I can pay for my groceries with regular money.

## People have short memories

I was a teenager in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. The whole world went from "banks are the most legit thing ever" to "bankers are criminals and banks are a scam". Now it's not even 2 decades later and we're back to pretending that banks know what they are doing and we should trust them not to blow up the global financial system.

I'm not saying crypto is the answer in the slightest. My point is that the comparison isn't between a trustworthy and stable system and a shadowy ecosystem of money launderers. The comparison is between shadowy money people who wear suits and shadowy money people who wear hoodies. The biggest difference is that the hoodie people make the system transparent by default, and the suit people make it opaque by default.

We should be sceptical of both and add regulatory guardrails on both.

## I'm not going to tell you what to invest in

But I know you are wondering what I do anyway. So this is what I will say: people get rich doing stupid things all the time. The trouble is that with speculation, it is really hard to tell what will do well and what will explode. If I look back at my crypto investing track record there are a few conclusions I can draw:

- I was lucky, in the right frame of mind in the right place at the right time
- My biggest win was not being stupid
- 10-50% of my results were due to me seeing/understanding things others didn't

As a general rule, all my profitable decisions came down to:

- Investing in things made by techies, the team page of a project should be full of developers, every business development person is a strike against the project
- Investing in things that do things that I perceived to be useful. No memecoins or NFTs for me. Sure you can make money there, but I have no idea how
- Make decisions on the scale of years, not months. Every time I try to do a short-term trade it blows up in my face, and I am kind of happy about that since it prevents me from thinking I'm smarter than the market

All of the above means that I take winnings when things go up. I invest in new things every 6-12 months.

I'll also point out that my traditional financial portfolio is larger than my crypto one. This book might give the impression I'm a crypto maximalist, but I'm not. I have a regular bank account, a regular mortgage, a regular pension scheme, and a regular (boring, indexed) investment portfolio. And my presence in the traditional finance system is much bigger than my crypto assets[^Ok fine, this depends a bit on whether the US Fed and internet trolls decided it is time for a bull market and every crypto asset goes up and down my double/triple digit percentages every day. However, it is not my intention to have my crypto portfolio be larger than my regular one. That said, I'm aware of the research on momentum and trend following. So while I take profits in bubbles, I don't jump out when the water gets warm.]

## Do you have questions or comments?

Thank you for making it this far in this little book. I appreciate that you spent a large amount of your time and attention on reading my perspective, even if you don't agree with it per se. As I indicated in the opening chapters, I endeavour to keep my opinions flexible. Changing your mind is not a sign of weakness, it's a sign of growth.

To that end, if you have an idea or perspective that you would like to share, feel free to reach out to me. Do keep in mind that I am usually a social media minimalist. I don't view my notifications very actively and often take a long time responding.

You can find me at:

- Twitter/X: @actuallymentor
- Discord: mentor.eth
- Linkedin: /in/mentorpalokaj

If you are going to send me friend requests on any platform, please use the intro message feature to introduce yourself. I ignore requests without them because most of them are bots.
